README.md, before:

# About mst-backbone

mst-backbone is a phylogeny inference program that uses minimum spanning trees to perform constrained search through tree-space. 

Here is the link to the preprint describing the performance of mst-backbone 

https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.06.30.180315v1

# Installation


```console
git clone https://github.com/prabhavk/mst-backbone-repo.git 
cd mst-backbone-repo/
make

```

Running make will create two programs mst-backbone and UNRESTselector. 

mst-backbone constructs phylogenetic trees by constraining the search through tree-space. Tree search is performed under the general Markov model using structural EM. 

UNRESTselector performs model selection by fitting non-stationary non-reversible non-homogeneous CT-HMM to phylogenetic trees inferred using mst-backbone.

# Using mst-backbone

```console
mst-backbone --seq alignment.fas --size subtree_size --out output_prefix
```
Input file:

alignment.fas: a multiple sequence alignment file in FASTA format

Parameters:

subtree_size: specifies the minimum number of non-zero weighted edges in the subgraphs induced by vertex sets $V_S$ and $V_O$. 

output_prefix: used for naming output files. Default prefix is input_alignment_mstbackbone.

Output files:

output_prefix.mst: the maximum parsimony (minimum evolution) spanning tree used for constraining search through tree-space. 

output_prefix.nwk: the output tree in NEWICK format

output_prefix.edges: the output tree in edge list format

output_prefix.mstbackbone_log: contains all the messages that is printed to terminal

# Using UNRESTselector

The model selection procedure described in the paper can be reproduced as follows.

```console
UNRESTselector --seq alignment.fas --out output_prefix --input_tree tree.[nwk|edges]
```

Input files:

alignment.fas: a multiple sequence alignment file in FASTA format

tree.[nwk|edges]: an unrooted phylogenetic tree in NEWICK format or edge list format. The location of the root is re-estimated using model selection if the input tree is rooted. 

Parameters:

output_prefix: prefix used for naming output files. Default prefix is alignment_UNRESTselector.

Output files:

output_prefix.nwk: the output tree in newick format

output_prefix.edges: the output tree in edge list format

output_prefix.params: the parameters of the selected model

output_prefix.UNRESTselector_log: contains all the messages that is printed to terminal

# Trouble-shooting

mst-backbone should work without issues on any UNIX-based system. Please contact kalaghatgi@molgen.mpg.de if you face issues using mst-backbone.

Commit message:

merging UNRESTselector with mst-backbone

README.md, after:

# About mst-backbone

mst-backbone is a phylogeny inference program that uses minimum spanning trees to perform constrained search through tree-space. 

Here is the link to the preprint describing the performance of mst-backbone 

https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.06.30.180315v1

# Installation


```console
git clone https://github.com/prabhavk/mst-backbone-repo.git 
cd mst-backbone-repo/
make all

```

mst-backbone constructs phylogenetic trees by constraining the search through tree-space. Tree search is performed under the general Markov model using structural EM. 

 
UNRESTselector.py performs model selection by fitting non-stationary non-reversible non-homogeneous CT-HMM to phylogenetic trees. 

# Using mst-backbone

```console
mst-backbone --seq alignment.fas --size subtree_size --out output_prefix
```
Input file:

alignment.fas: a multiple sequence alignment file in FASTA format

Parameters:

subtree_size: constraint on the minimum number of non-zero weighted edges in the subgraphs induced by vertex sets $V_S$ and $V_O$ 

output_prefix: used for naming output files. Default prefix is alignment_mstbackbone

Output files:

output_prefix.mst: the maximum parsimony spanning tree used for constraining search through tree-space 

output_prefix.nwk: the output tree in NEWICK format

output_prefix.edges: the output tree in EDGE LIST format

output_prefix.mstbackbone_log: contains all the messages that is printed to terminal

# Using UNRESTselector

The model selection procedure described in the paper can be reproduced as follows.

```console
python3 UNRESTselector.py --seq alignment.fas --out output_prefix --input_tree tree.nwk
```

Input files:

alignment.fas: a multiple sequence alignment file in FASTA format

tree.edges: an unrooted phylogenetic tree in EDGE LIST OR NEWICK format. The location of the root is re-estimated using BIC if the input tree is rooted

Parameters:

output_prefix: prefix used for naming output files. Default prefix is alignment_UNRESTselector

Output files:

output_prefix.nwk: the output tree in newick format

output_prefix.edges: the output tree in edge list format

output_prefix.params: the parameters of the selected model

output_prefix.BIC: BIC of the selected model
